---
title: Bot FAQ
author: random-irchelper
status: historical
layout: default
---
**Ed. note: This page was rescued from ircworks.com when it got
discontinued. Links may or may not work, it is maintained here just for
the information contained on this page itself. -Jolo**

# Bot FAQ:

![RAD Bot ](bot_faq_files/robot-radrob-2.jfif)


## What is a bot?

Short for **Robot**, it is an **I**nternet **R**elay **C**hat (IRC)
client that is scripted to react to exterior commands and events without
direct input from a user at a keyboard.

## What are bots used for?
Most bots are benign and used to keep a particular channel open. Often
they are used for channel maintenance, such as kicking users for rude
language, to stop flooding in a channel, or remove offensive nicks.

Other bots have a specific purpose, such as helping to run a game or
serving virtual drinks. A few can be abusive bots such as war or
takeover bots. Almost all IRC Nets and servers do not allow **war** or
**takeover** bots. Attempting to run such bots is a quick way to get
k-lined from a network.

Some Networks such as **Undernet** provides services to registered
channels via bots \"X\" and \"W\". DALnet provides services without
using bots per se. EFnet does not provide services for its channels,
leaving that up to each individual channel to provide. (Okay, they just
started a very limited \"re-op\" service).

## Bot Operating Systems
Bots are usually one of two kinds: 1. Unix or linux based bots that
operate from a shell account. 2. Windows based bots that operate from a
windows based machine. The most common on IRC is the Eggshell bot (also
called an \"eggie\" or \"eggbot\").  However, with more 24/7 accounts
available via cable modem or DSL accounts, running a Windows based bot
is becoming easier.

## Which is better, Eggbots or Windows bots?
The one that does what you need for the least amount of expense and
effort is usually the \"best\" bot. Eggbot\'s are generally acknowledged
as being much more stable (up and connected) than windows bots. However,
a good windows based machine without a lot of other processing on it can
keep a bot up and connected for weeks at a time.  And it\'s a handy way
to use that old computer that is gathering dust in the corner.  Eggies
are probably harder to get up and started for a new user, but take less
attention overall. 

![R24 Bot ](bot_faq_files/robot-R24R-1.jfif)

## How do I get an EggBot?
You need a shell account. These usually cost money, running from 10 or
15 dollars a month for a shell account. Then you need to install a
script, compile it and keep it updated.  Most free shell providers do
not allow IRC eggbots!  You will have to pay for a shell account on a
server, then upload, compile, and configure your bot script.

Excellent resources for info about Shell Accounts and Eggies is
available from:
[http://www.shellcentral.com](http://web.archive.org/web/20030810150105/http://www.shellcentral.com/)
[http://www.xcalibre.com](http://web.archive.org/web/20030810150105/http://www.xcalibre.com/)
[http://www.eggdrops.org/](http://web.archive.org/web/20030810150105/http://www.eggdrops.org/)

A couple of IRC friendly shell providers are
[http://www.linuxshell.net/](http://web.archive.org/web/20030810150105/http://www.linuxshell.net/)
and
[http://www.lomag.com/](http://web.archive.org/web/20030810150105/http://www.lomag.com/)

## How do I get a windows based bot?
If you have a 24/7 (24 hours a day / 7 days a week) account, normally a
cable or **D**igital **S**ubscriber **L**ine (DSL) account, you can
usually purchase a second unique **I**nternet **P**rotocol number (IP)
from the provider for a nominal cost.  It costs me five bucks a month
with ATT\'s \@home service, for instance (but then there is the cost of
electricity and so on). 

Setting up a bot from your standard computer or an **I**nternet
**C**onnection **S**haring (ICS) computer using the same address will
basically end up looking like a \"clone\". That can get you kicked or
k-lined from a server. Ideally, your bot should be on a computer with
it\'s own unique IP. However, some servers allow two clients from the
same address.  Check the server\'s **M**essage **O**f **T**he **D**ay
(MOTD) to see if they do (simply type: **/motd** ).  Depending on which
IRC client software you like to use, you need to download (or write)\...
a bot script for that client. If you are going to run a mIRC bot, I
suggest checking out
[http://www.xcalibre.com ](http://web.archive.org/web/20030810150105/http://www.xcalibre.com/)
or
[http://www.mircscripts.org ](http://web.archive.org/web/20030810150105/http://www.mircscripts.org/) for
bot scripts.

## I have a Local Area Network (LAN) at home running through a gateway computer.  Can I use one of these machines to be a bot while I chat on another one?

Technically yes, but you still end up looking like a \"clone\" because
both machines will have the same IP.  Some servers will allow you to run
a second \"instance\" of your client as a bot, others will not.  If the
bot is a game bot or amusement bot, you probably have a better chance of
running it as a second instance.  But for a long term bot connection,
the machine hosting your bot should have a unique IP, ideally.


robot graphics courtesy of
[robotnut.com](http://web.archive.org/web/20030810150105/http://www.robotnut.com/)


**Ed. note: This page was rescued from ircworks.com when it got
discontinued. Links may or may not work, it is maintained here just for
the information contained on this page itself. -Jolo**
