---
title: "The Internet's Wilder Side"
author: New York Times Company
datecreated: 6 May 2004
status: historical
layout: default
---

##### May 6, 2004

## The Internet's Wilder Side

**By SETH SCHIESEL**  

T was just another
Wednesday on the sprawling Internet chat-room network known as I.R.C. In a
room called Prime-Tyme-Movies, users offered free pirated downloads of "The
Passion of the Christ'' and "Kill Bill Vol. 2.'' In the DDO-Matrix channel,
illegal copies of Microsoft's
Windows software and "Prince of Persia: The Sands of Time,'' an Xbox game,
were ripe for downloading. In other chat rooms yesterday, whole albums of free
MP3's were hawked with blaring capital letters. And in a far less obtrusive
channel, a hacker may well have been checking his progress of hacking into the
computers of unsuspecting Internet users.

Even as much of the Internet has come to resemble a pleasant, well-policed
suburb, a little-known neighborhood known as Internet Relay Chat remains the
Wild West. While copyright holders and law enforcement agencies take aim at
their adversaries on Web sites and peer-to-peer file-sharing networks like
Napster, I.R.C. remains the place where people with something to hide go to do
business.

Probably no more than 500,000 people are using I.R.C. worldwide at any time,
and many of them are engaged in legitimate activities, network administrators
say. Yet that pirated copy of Microsoft Office or Norton Utilities that turns
up on a home-burned CD-ROM may well have originated on I.R.C. And the Internet
viruses and "denial of service'' attacks that periodically make news generally
get their start there, too. This week, the network's chat rooms were abuzz
with what seemed like informed chatter about the Sasser worm, which infected
hundreds of thousands of computers over the weekend.

"I.R.C. is where you are going to find your 'elite' level pirates,'' said John
R. Wolfe, director for enforcement at the Business Software Alliance, a trade
group that fights software piracy. "If they were only associating with each
other and inbreeding, maybe we could coexist alongside them. But it doesn't
work that way. What they're doing on I.R.C. has a way of permeating into
mainstream piracy.''

Two weeks ago, the F.B.I., in conjunction with law enforcement agencies in 10
foreign countries, announced an operation called Fastlink, aimed at shutting
down the activities of almost 100 people suspected of helping operate illegal
software vaults on the Internet. The pirated copies of music, films, games and
other software were generally distributed using a separate Internet file-
transfer system, said a Justice Department spokesman, but the actual pirates
generally used I.R.C. to communicate and coordinate with one another.

"The groups targeted as part of Fastlink are alleged to have used I.R.C. to
have committed their crimes, like almost all other warez groups,'' the
spokesman, Michael Kulstad, said in a telephone interview. Warez, pronounced
like wares, is techie slang for illegally copied software.

When I.R.C. started in the 1980's, it was best known as a way for serious
computer professionals worldwide to communicate in real time. It is still
possible - though sometimes a bit difficult - to find mature technical
discussions among the tens of thousands of I.R.C. chat rooms, known as
channels, operating at any one time. There are also respectable I.R.C. systems
and channels - some operated by universities or Internet service providers -
for gamers seeking opponents or those who want to talk about sports or
hobbies.

Still, I.R.C. perhaps most closely resembles the cantina scene in "Star
Wars'': a louche hangout of digital smugglers, pirates, curiosity seekers and
the people who love them (or hunt them). There seem to be I.R.C. channels
dedicated to every sexual fetish, and I.R.C. users speculate that terrorists
also use the networks to communicate in relative obscurity. Yet I.R.C. has its
advocates, who point to its legitimate uses.

"I.R.C. is where all of the kids come on and go nuts,'' William A. Bierman, a
college student in Hawaii who helps develop I.R.C. server software and who is
known online as billy-jon, said in a telephone interview. "All of the
attention I.R.C. has gotten over the years has been because it's a haven for
criminals, which is a very one-sided view.

"The whole idea behind I.R.C. is freedom of speech. There is really no
structure on the Internet for policing I.R.C., and there are intentionally no
rules. Obviously you're not allowed to hack the Pentagon, but there are no
rules like 'You can't say this' or 'You can't do that.' "

It is almost impossible to determine exactly how many people use I.R.C. and
what they use it for, because it takes only some basic technical know-how to
run an I.R.C. server. Because it is generally a text-only medium, it does not
require high-capacity Internet connections, making it relatively easy to run a
private I.R.C. server from home.

Some Internet experts believe that child pornography rings sometimes use their
own private, password-protected I.R.C. servers. Particularly wary users can
try to hide their identity by logging in to I.R.C. servers only through
intermediary computers. There are, however, scores of public I.R.C. networks,
like DALnet, EFNet and Undernet. Each typically ties together dozens of
individual chat servers that may handle thousands of individual users each.

"We're seeing progressively more and more people coming onto the network every
year,'' said Rob Mosher, known online as nyt (for knight), who runs a server
in the EFNet network. "As more and more people get broadband, they are moving
away from AOL and they still want to have chat.''

For end users, using I.R.C. is relatively simple. First, the user downloads an
I.R.C. client program (in the same way that Internet Explorer is a Web client
program and Eudora is an e-mail client program). There are a number of I.R.C.
clients available, but perhaps the most popular is a Windows shareware program
known as mIRC (www.mirc.com).

When users run the I.R.C. program, they can choose among dozens of public
networks. Within a given network, it does not really matter which individual
server one uses. Alternately, if users know the Internet address of a private
server, they can type in that address. Once logged in to a public server, the
user can generate a list of thousands of available channels. On an unmoderated
network, the most popular channels are often dedicated to trading music, films
and software.

That is because in addition to supporting text-only chat rooms, I.R.C. allows
a user to send a file directly to another user without clogging the main
server.

That capability has a lot of legitimate uses for transferring big files that
would be rejected by an e-mail system. Want to send your brother across the
country a digital copy of your home movie without burning a disc and putting
it in the mailbox? The file-transfer capability in I.R.C. may be the most
convenient way.

Naturally, that file-transfer capability also has a lot of less legitimate
uses. Advanced I.R.C. pirates automate the distribution of illegally copied
material so that when a user sends a private message, the requested file is
sent automatically. It is fairly common on I.R.C. for such a system to send
out hundreds or even thousands of copies of the same file (like a music album
or a pirated copy of Windows) over a few weeks.

An official from the Recording Industry Association of America said that some
hackers even obtain albums that have been recorded but not yet released.
"Quite often, once they get their hands on a prerelease, they will use I.R.C.
as the first distribution before it goes out into the wider Internet,'' Brad
A. Buckles, the association's executive vice president for antipiracy efforts,
said in a telephone interview.

But perhaps the most disruptive use of I.R.C. is as a haven and communications
medium for those who release viruses or try to disable Web sites and other
Internet servers.

In some ways, the biggest problem is Microsoft Windows itself. Windows has
holes that can allow a hacker to install almost anything on a computer that
lacks a protective program or device called a firewall. Users' vulnerability
can be compounded if they have not installed the latest patches from
Microsoft.

Hackers scan through millions of possible Internet addresses looking for those
unprotected computers and then use them to initiate coordinated "denial of
service'' attacks, which flood the target machine (say, a Web site) with
thousands or millions of spurious requests. In all of the noise, legitimate
users find the target site unavailable.

How can a hacker direct his army of compromised drones to the target of the
day? Through I.R.C.

"Each time it breaks into a new computer and turns it into a drone, the
program copies itself and proceeds to keep scanning, and so very quickly you
can have a very large number of drones,'' Mr. Bierman said, adding that a worm
may well include a small custom-made I.R.C. client. "Then all of the drones
connect to I.R.C. and go into one channel made especially for them. Then the
runner can give commands to all of those drones.''

Chris Behrens, an I.R.C. software developer in Arizona known online as
Comstud, said: "It's amazing how many machines at home are hacked or have been
exploited in some way. We have seen 10,000 hacked machines connect to I.R.C.
at one time, and they all go park themselves in a channel somewhere so someone
can come along and tell them who to attack.''

Mr. Bierman and other I.R.C. developers and administrators said that they were
contacted by federal law enforcement officials fairly often. Mr. Bierman said
that he sometimes cooperated in helping the government track down specific
people using I.R.C. to wage major attacks. He added, however, that he had
refused government officials' requests to build a back door into his I.R.C.
software that would allow agents to monitor I.R.C. more easily.

"Basically the F.B.I. is interested in the best way to monitor the traffic,''
Mr. Bierman said.

Mr. Kulstad of the Justice Department declined to comment on its specific
contacts with the I.R.C. community.

Mr. Bierman and other I.R.C. administrators said that in addition to their
free-speech concerns, they were also reluctant to confront hackers, because
angry hackers often turn their drones against I.R.C. servers themselves.

Mr. Mosher echoed other I.R.C. administrators in saying that attempts to
regulate the shady dealings online were doomed to failure.

"Look, if we find one channel and close it, they move to another,'' he said.
"It's been like this for years. You can't really stop it.''

  
Copyright 2004 
[The New York Times Company](http://www.nytco.com/) |
[Home](http://www.nytimes.com/) | 
[Privacy Policy](http://www.nytimes.com/ref/membercenter/help/privacy.html) |
[Search](http://query.nytimes.com/search/advanced/) |
[Corrections](http://www.nytimes.com/corrections.html) |
[Help](http://www.nytimes.com/membercenter/sitehelp.html)

