---
title: talkcity announcement
layout: default
redirect_from:
  - /irchelp/misc/talkcity.html
---

**Ed. note:** We at [IRChelp.org](/) are not affiliated in any way with TalkCity. The following letter was sent out to all registered TC members, and we are providing it here purely for information purposes. All comments should be directed to the CEO of TC using the email link at the bottom. -Jolo



Letter from the CEO of Talk City

Discussing Changes to Chat Service

October 1, 2001

The recent national tragedy has caused me to think deeply about our community.
After all, with over 5 million active participants every month, Talk City can
be viewed as the second largest city in the United States, in between New York
City and Los Angeles. As one of our members, you are already well aware that
our _city_ is the online home to a diverse community of people representing
all age groups, all forms of ethnic and cultural origins, and a wide range of
religious and political beliefs. Of course, one of the key reasons why Talk
City has grown into such a populous and diverse community is due to the fact
that anyone with Internet access has had the ability to join our community and
to do so free of charge.

More recently, we have started to introduce some new fee-based services that
offer benefits that are not available elsewhere on other large chat sites like
Yahoo, AOL or MSN. A good example is our program where we offer individuals
the opportunity to purchase their own chat rooms. Then as owners, they are
given special authorities and privileges to host, operate and manage their
rooms. While we will continue to introduce such fee-based services offering
competitively unique benefits, Talk City at its core will always be free and
we will continue to welcome all on the Internet to join our thriving
community.

That said, the horrific events of September 11th have weighed heavily on my
heart and have caused me to think deeply about issues concerning online
safety. It is no secret that the Internet is sometimes used by the worst
elements of society and I am sure it has not been that long since you heard
about _that terrible crime_ and the victim met his/her assailant in a chat
room. It is not my intent to scare anyone, but everyone online has a
responsibility to face reality, and as we all learned painfully in the real
world, every community must be prepared to deal with all kinds of dangers and
threats. For us at Talk City, the reality is that we are faced with daily
threats in multiple forms. As a result, we devote many resources trying to
fight and eliminate such cyber-threats. Oftentimes, we are called by law
enforcement agencies requesting support and we cooperate as required. But even
with all we already do to keep our community safe and secure, recent events
have compelled me to think about how we can do more. My answer is simple Talk
City is going to strive to create an area within its community capable of
offering higher levels of safety, security, and accountability than any other
online community on the Internet. It will be an enhanced area of our service
where people will have greater protection from threats of abuse, harassment,
cyber-attacks, and generally harmful acts, and it will be an area where
parents will have a greater ability to protect their children.

To effect this new level of service within Talk City, changes will be made to
our site and they will occur in three phases, starting with

  * Phase I Sometime very soon, you will notice a change in the way we categorize our chat rooms. All rooms will be classified into one of three distinct categories respectively named _Hosted Rooms_, _Featured Rooms_, and _Open Rooms_. Hosted Rooms are designed to be the safest rooms on Talk City as they will be moderated and monitored by a team of Talk City employees and volunteer hosts. Featured Rooms, on the other hand, represent those rooms that offer a high degree of self-policing capability, including some rooms that have been purchased by our members as well as those long-standing rooms with consistent and loyal supporters who have proven their ability to maintain stability without the persistent need for hosts. Our hosts, however, will maintain an _on-call_ presence to support Featured Rooms. The last category, Open Rooms, will contain all other chat rooms. Much like the chat rooms you find on Yahoo, MSN, or Lycos, Open Rooms will not be moderated or monitored. And while it remains the obligation of every Talk City member to abide by and respect our Community Standards regardless of room category, our ability to monitor violations and enforce our standards will be very limited in the Open Rooms area.

  * Phase II  Then, sometime a short time later, the Hosted Rooms and Featured Rooms will become _secured_ areas. The goal here is to create an environment where people can feel safe, secure, and protected. The only way for us, as a company, to do this is to know an individual's real identity. Therefore, members who wish to enter chat rooms in these secured areas will be asked to provide verifiable information about themselves, and to do so as a part of subscribing for an annual membership and to pay a nominal fee of $1.00 (One Dollar) per month. It is the information we collect via the payment process that provides the level of personal accountability and authenticity. Needless to say, anyone who violates Talk City standards in these rooms or engages in attacks on individual members or rooms will immediately forfeit their membership and be denied access to the secured areas of our site. We will safeguard your personal information with a high level of care and we will describe to you what uses we will make of this information before we ask you to provide it. Let me add that we intend to continue to comply with the commitment to privacy that we have stated in our Privacy Policy, and the forthcoming changes to this Policy will continue to reflect our respect for your privacy and anonymity within the community.

Let me also emphasize that the initiatives outlined above do not represent a
wholesale change to Talk City and, for most of you, nothing will change. In
fact, of the many thousands of chat rooms that are active every day on Talk
City, we expect 90% of them to remain in the Open Rooms category and
participation in these rooms will remain open and free of charge. The sole
purpose of establishing a _secured_ area is to address the needs of those
members who seek a higher level of safety and accountability.


Please note that if you are already a paying subscriber in other Talk City
programs (e.g. Chat Room Ownership or Home Page Subscription) you will _not_
have to pay for this new program. Moreover, owners of purchased rooms will
have the option of choosing to be listed in Featured Rooms or Open Rooms.

  * Phase III  In order to ensure that we continue to create programs designed to enhance the safety and security of our community, I have decided to create a _Community Advisory Board_ consisting of representatives of the volunteer hosts, the user community, and Talk City management. I am currently envisioning a committee of six, with two representatives from each group. Although the first, original slate of representatives will be appointed, it is my plan to have subsequent community representatives be popularly elected. The task of determining such election guidelines and procedures will be one of the first items on the founding committee's agenda. Another pressing item on the agenda will be to help in the development of a program and budget for increased hosting services in the secured areas, which will allow for greater supervision and better accountability. Much like the way our own government can only be elected by citizens, the privilege to vote will be held only by paying members of Talk City.

My vision is to transform Talk City into the safest and most accountable
community on the Internet and to do so with an optimal balance of security and
openness. As is the case in the real world, the success of any community or
society rests upon its ability to ensure the well-being of its members by
having the capability to prevent and/or take appropriate measures against
threats. With your help and participation, it is my resolve to create such an
environment within our little corner of the world.

> > > Very sincerely yours,

>>>

>>>> Robert Young

CEO, Talk City

Email: [TalkCityCEO@myesp.com](mailto:TalkCityCEO@myesp.com)

