---
title: 'Liz Byrne: Thesis :CyberFusion'
author: Elisabeth Byrne
datecreated: November 1994
status: historical
layout: default
---


### Introduction

*\"Cyberspace: A common mental geography, built, in turn by consensus
and revolution, canon and experiment; a territory swarming with data and
lies, with mind stuff and memories of nature, with a million voices and
two million eyes in a silent, invisible concert of enquiry, deal-making,
dream sharing and simple beholding.\"*
(Benedikt, 1991, p 2)  

\"Cyberspace\", a term coined by William Gibson in his novel Neuromancer
(1984), has been used to describe the new, imaginary places where humans
communicate, made possible by recent technological developments in CMC.
Cyberspace is constituted by a global computer network called the
Internet. Like other communications technologies before ( telegraph,
telephone, television, etc ( the new array of communications
technologies which constitute cyberspace have immense consequences for
human interaction. This thesis explores one dimension of these
consequences ( the formation of interpersonal ties ( in one type of CMC:
Internet Relay Chat (IRC), a multi- user, real-time program. The
emergence of these new sites for human communication provides space for
\'cyberfusion\' ( the development of human relationships in cyberspace.

The Internet began originally as ARPANET, a computer network set up by
the United States Advanced Research Projects Agency, an arm of the
United States Department of Defence. The network linked two universities
in the United States in a bid to facilitate research and communication.
Over time more educational institutions joined the network. In 1983
ARPANET was split into two networks: ARPANET for research and MILNET for
military use. The research arm grew even further, adding government and
commercial groups to the network. With the advent of satellite
communications, similar networks all over the world were linked, forming
the Internet (Reid, 1991). Now, in 1994, there are over 20 million users
connected to the Internet around the world (The Australian, 14 June,
1994).

Users of the Internet can communicate in a variety of ways: electronic
mail (email), usenet or network news, talk, Multi-User Dungeons (MUDs),
and IRC. IRC, which is the focus of this thesis, was a program developed
by Jakko Oikarinen in 1988 which enabled many users to communicate with
each other at once in real-time, something not possible with existing
programs. Within IRC there are channels which act like rooms in which
discussions take place. These channels (both public and private) are
necessary to divide the 5000 plus users that are on IRC at any one time.
Anyone can join a public channel to participate in the discussion,
however private messages can also be exchanged between two users which
are unavailable to anyone else (Poon, 1993, p 65-67).

The potential of the Internet is such that it allows the rapid exchange
of information between people all over the world. It is frequently
argued that the Internet, more than any other medium, makes possible
free, open and equal access to information. If kept free from government
regulation and censorship, this will facilitate steps to greater global
\'democracy\'. This belief is best seen in the writings of Kapor (1993,
1994) from the Electronic Frontiers Foundation which is actively working
to keep the Internet an open system.

The Internet also allows communication between people who would not
previously have been in contact. People from all around the world, it is
claimed, have the opportunity to engage in conversation and form
relationships without the barriers of ethnicity, nationality, class,
religion, gender and age, enhancing the possibility of global
\'community\'. (Rheingold, 1994; Reid, 1991, 1993)

Grand claims for the democratic and communal potential of the Internet
are, however, often made without recourse to a detailed analysis of the
new forms of interpersonal communication that came about with forms of
CMC such as IRC. All communication on the Internet, for example, is
textual and the people communicating are invisible to each other. This
means that communication is very different to that which takes place on
a FTF level. The implications of this are such that the ways in which
people communicate, relate to each other and fuse together in
relationships are altered. While these implications have been
investigated on a larger scale, looking at issues of community
(Rheingold, 1994), the same implications must be looked at on an
interpersonal level.

New technologies which have the potential to reshape communication are,
nevertheless, always introduced into social contexts with existing forms
of human relationships, values and meanings. This thesis seeks to
explore the ways this medium of communication alters the way people
communicate, and yet also how it is that relationship formation in this
medium on an interpersonal level reproduces aspects of FTF communication
by users adapting the medium to their needs. The users of IRC in this
adaptation develop and maintain the many types of relationships that are
present in FTF communication from enemies to friends to lovers.

A social interaction perspective will be adopted to look at
interpersonal relationships, using theories that address the formation
of relationships and their subsequent development. In particular, social
penetration theory developed by Altman and Taylor (1973) and an
attraction theory developed by Levinger and Snoek (1972) will be used in
conjunction with one another to understand the process of relationship
formation. The literature surrounding CMC will also be investigated to
understand the impact that this type of communication has had. In
particular, social presence theory, developed by Short, Williams and
Christie (1976), will be used to account for the changes brought about
by the medium of communication.

In chapter one, the two areas of relationship formation and CMC will be
outlined. This will be followed by a critical analysis of the three
theories which when merged will form a suitable framework and method for
the investigation of relationship formation on IRC. In this merger,
three major issues emerge which will be discussed in the following
chapters. Chapter two argues that while the medium alters the ways and
contexts of communication, users of IRC have developed adaptations of
verbal and Nonverbal Communication (NVC) as well as creating a new
context in which to communicate. Once the means of communication has
been established, chapter three will outline the problem of \'self\'
inherent in the two relationship formation theories by pointing to the
dramaturgical theory by Goffman (1969) and the social selves theory as
presented by Burkitt (1991) to best account for the problems of
presenting and perceiving an accurate understanding of the self on IRC.
In arguing for a social understanding of the self, it will be seen how
issues of power and gender are important in the investigation of
relationship formation.

It is hoped that through this discussion, a better understanding of how
relationships form in a computer mediated environment will be obtained.

### next\... [Chapter One](/communication-research/academic/byrne-e-cyberfusion-1993/thesis1-chapt1.html)

###### HTML by Stephen Gillies : max\@magna.com.au Copyright Elisabeth Byrne 1994 : University of Western Sydney, Nepean
