---
title: 'Liz Byrne: Thesis :CyberFusion'
author: Elisabeth Byrne
datecreated: November 1994
status: historical
layout: default
---


The Formation of Relationships on Internet Relay Chat (IRC)
-----------------------------------------------------------

A thesis submitted to the University of Western Sydney, Nepean as
partial fulfilment for the degree of Bachelor of Arts (Honours) in
Applied Communication Studies.

by
Elisabeth Byrne

Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences
November, 1994

### Acknowledgments

I would like to thank my supervisor, Greg, for his support,
encouragement and advice without which I would never have written this
thesis. I would also like to thank Marsha and Ray who took the time to
listen to my problems and read over drafts. I also have to thank my
family for putting up with my endless hours in front of the family
computer. Thanks also go Chris for understanding and listening to my
crazy and sometimes weird ideas and M whose fault it was that I came to
know about IRC. Also, thanks to all the crazy people on \#Aussies, those
I interviewed, the people who were motivated enough to fill in my
surveys and the many and varied nicks who appear in my logs.

### Abstract

New technologies have the potential to reshape human communication. With
the emergence of Computer Mediated Communication (CMC), this thesis
seeks to explore the ways this medium alters the way people communicate
on Internet Relay Chat (IRC), and yet also how it is that relationship
formation in this medium on an interpersonal level reproduces aspects of
Face to Face (FTF) communication by users adapting the medium to their
needs. The users of IRC in this adaptation develop and maintain the many
types of relationships that are present in FTF communication from
enemies to friends to lovers.

This thesis explores the nature of relationship formation on IRC using
three theories. These theories show that relationships formed on IRC
bare many similarities to FTF relationships, however, because new
technology reshapes human relationships and because of the specific
medium of CMC and its absence of physical presence, communication on IRC
is developed in a specific nature as users adapt to the weaknesses and
strengths of the medium. As a result, this thesis shows that IRC users
develop a communicative richness, novel ways of expressing information
and emotional meaning in relationship formation.

This thesis also explores the nature of the presentation and perception
of self in CMC in contrast to the relatively simple notions of self
expressed in the relationship formation theories. It is suggested that
the peculiar nature of CMC and its absence of physical presence,
highlights the extent to which the self presented in relationships is
changeable depending on issues such as context. Using Goffman (1969)
this thesis explores the various dimensions of the self on IRC. It is
also noted that IRC, like all communications technologies, is inserted
and developed in the context of existing social relations. It explores
the way in which traditional forms of power are negotiated on IRC
focusing particularly on the question of gender but also the way in
which new forms of power relations are developed through the new medium.

### Contents

#### [Introduction](/communication-research/academic/byrne-e-cyberfusion-1993/thesis1-intro.html)

#### [Chapter 1 - Literature Review](/communication-research/academic/byrne-e-cyberfusion-1993/thesis1-chapt1.html)

#### [Chapter 2 - CyberTalk](/communication-research/academic/byrne-e-cyberfusion-1993/thesis1-chapt2.html)

#### [Chapter 3 - CyberEgo](/communication-research/academic/byrne-e-cyberfusion-1993/thesis1-chapt3.html)

#### [Conclusion](/communication-research/academic/byrne-e-cyberfusion-1993/thesis1-concl.html)

#### [Reference List](/communication-research/academic/byrne-e-cyberfusion-1993/thesis1-rest.html)

#### [Appendix](/communication-research/academic/byrne-e-cyberfusion-1993/thesis1-rest.html#append)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### next\... [Introduction](/communication-research/academic/byrne-e-cyberfusion-1993/thesis1-intro.html)

###### HTML by Stephen Gillies : max\@magna.com.au Copyright Elisabeth Byrne 1994 : University of Western Sydney, Nepean
