---
title: 'Liz Byrne: Thesis :CyberFusion'
author: Elisabeth Byrne
datecreated: November 1994
status: historical
layout: default
---


Chapter 2 : CyberTalk
---------------------

When communicating with someone FTF, there are a number of aspects to
that communication. Social penetration theory argues that there are
three aspects to this: verbal behaviour, nonverbal use of the body and
use of the physical environment. Without these aspects of communication
the formation of relationships would not be possible. However, social
presence theory indicates that there is a difference when using CMC as
the communicants are invisible to each other and text on the computer
screen is the only information given. As a result of this, communication
is not available in the same way as it is FTF and if relationships are
to be formed using CMC, users must adapt the medium to reproduce verbal,
nonverbal and environmental aspects of communication.

In this chapter it will be shown how the users of IRC have in fact
adapted the medium so that the formation of relationships can take place
developing new forms of expression to compensate for the lack of
physical presence. This will be done by investigating, first, the use of
verbal and NVC on IRC, and secondly, the \'physical environment\' of
IRC.

### A. Verbal and Nonverbal Communication

Verbal and NVC are vital to the forming of interpersonal relationships
on a FTF level. Verbal communication consists of words and sentences,
while NVC is obtained from the physical movements of another person
during a conversation. For the purposes of this thesis, verbal refers to
communication using words generally, including written text. NVC on IRC
is also textual but involves the manipulation of keyboard commands and
symbols.

According to Forgas (1989), verbal communication is \"the messages sent
using words and sentences\", whereas NVCs \"support, modify or even
completely replace the verbal message  consisting of eye gaze, smiles,
gestures, postural changes, and so on.\" (p 137) Forgas goes on to argue
that NVC is not simply another alternative to using language, but has
very different characteristics to language. He says that there are three
ways in which NVC differs from verbal communication. First, NVC is
\"much more immediate and automatic\" (p 140) and so takes less time to
decode than do verbal messages. A whole sentence takes longer to
understand, interpret and to prepare a reply to than simply smiling at a
friend. Secondly, NVC is often less subject to conscious interpretation
and monitoring than is the case with language. As a result, nonverbal
cues may often give a speaker away, revealing attitudes, feelings and
emotions which they may not want to reveal. This is known as nonverbal
leakage. Thirdly, NVC tends to be much more efficient in transmitting
information about attitudes and emotions. For example, a smiling friend
who runs over to hug someone expresses their joy in being able to see
that person with a simple gesture rather than having to express this
emotion in words. Forgas (1989) concludes that the consequence of these
differences is that \"language is primarily suited to conveying
information about the external world, tasks to be solved and the like
\" while NVC plays \" a particularly important role in social life,
communicating values, attitudes, liking, and other personal reactions.\"
(p 141)

The combination of verbal and NVC, then, provides a complementary
richness in the expression of information and emotions in the formation
of relationships. However, on IRC, this communication cannot take place
in the same way as there is no physical person that can be seen. Hence,
to convey a communicative richness, both verbal and NVC appear as text
on the screen. It has therefore been argued that because communication
is never spoken on IRC, all communication is therefore nonverbal. Yet,
it appears that written text does contain elements of both verbal and
NVC. While verbal communication appears as the written sentences, NVC is
seen textually in the use of bold, underlining, italics, etc, which act
in the same way as someone saying something loudly to attract attention
(Daniels and Spiker, 1991).

Users of IRC have recognised the importance of both verbal and NVC in
forming relationships and so have adapted the medium to allow them to
distinguish between the two. This is achieved by representing verbal
communication in the form of sentences while NVC is characterised in
three ways: a) the manipulation of keyboard symbols to create
\'emoticons\' (iconic representations of emotions), b) a combination of
IRC commands and words known as \'actions\' (eg, \*hug\* to indicate
hugging), and c) \'textual markers\' (changes in spelling and the use of
underlining, bold, exclamation marks, etc).

#### a) Emoticons

Emoticons involve the manipulation of keyboard symbols to form facial
expressions. Their use is varied and there are an endless amount of
combinations. Some examples of these are as follows (for the best effect
they should be viewed side on):

      

    :-) or :) a smiling face (known as smilies)  

    :-( or :( a sad face   

    :'-( a person crying   

    ;-) a wink  

    *8) a person wearing glasses with funny hair   

    =) a person with squinting eyes  

The use of these emoticons are quite frequent in the flow of
conversation and are used to convey humour, sarcasm, happiness, sadness,
anger, confusion, etc. They are also used quite often in conjunction
with the other forms of NVC. The following log is an example of the use
of emoticons and other NVC in a typical enthusiastic greeting as people
who are known join \#Aussies:

      

    [metta] mikey :)  

    * hari thumps richard and steals the choccy MINE MINE MINE  

    [Wiccan] hey hari.  

    [hari] hi lisabeth :-) *lick*  

    [hari] hi metta *lick*  

    [hari] hi tz *puke* :-))))  

    *** McAdder ... has joined channel #aussies  

    * SmogNut huggles her bertie  

    [SmogNut] (:  

    [tz] adderyone  

    [Wiccan] McAdder! :) hey.  

    [McAdder] hey els :)  

    [GrayElf] Hey Mc! :-)  

    [Lisabeth] mcadder!!!!!!  

    [McAdder] tz, wiccan :) paul, l' :))  

As can been seen, the use of emoticons is quite frequent. If the smilies
were not present, many of the statements made in the above log may have
appeared impersonal or been misunderstood. Their use is considered quite
important for conveying meaning especially as much of the conversation
is casual and informal and attempts to simulate conversation on a FTF
level as far as possible. One interviewee reflected upon this:

M: *you can change the whole meaning of something with a smiley.*\
Elisabeth: *I tend to forget to put a smiley on the end of my sentences
and when that happens it sounds really cold.*\
M: *some times I\'ll say things that have a time period between the
sentence and the smiley, so they think about what I have said and then
the smiley will come and they\'ll understand. People also do that in
real life with sarcasm.*

### b) Actions

Actions are a way of expressing a particular nonverbal event without
actually describing it. While the person has to actually say that they
are doing something, a new convention has been created which indicates a
particular word construction is an \'action\' rather than describing
that action.

These actions take two forms. One form is accomplished by writing the
action in asterisks such as \*hug\*, \*smile\*, \*cry\*, \*nod\*,
\*yawn\*, \*sneeze\*, etc. The second form uses the action command
itself which involves typing \"/me\" followed by a string of text. For
example, a person with the nick (nickname) Fred may type \"/me scratches
his nose\" which when sent to a channel will look like \"\*Fred
scratches his nose\". The following log shows how these actions are
used:

      

    * SmogNut throws pebbles at everyone  

    [SmogNut] *toink*  

    [SmogNut] *toink*  

    [Lisabeth] everyone has gone suddenly quiet  

    * muz threatens elsie with a live bunsen burner  

    [Lisabeth] you can hear a pin drop... or pebble rather  

    * Bram grabs the pebble and eats it *crunch*  

    [SmogNut] is it on a safety flame, muz? (:  

    * Lisabeth picks up the pebbles and throws them back  

    * SmogNut ducks  

### c) Textual Markers

The textual markers of NVC on IRC are found in the use of
non-conventional spelling and the use of bold, underlining and
exclamation marks. These elements serve to mimic speech patterns and
features not always available in written words.

Unconventional spelling is often used on IRC to reproduce the way words
sound in speech instead of complying with the conventions of written
spelling. This element may help to convey a characteristic way of
speaking of a particular person that would not be known about unless
heard. It is also used to reflect the informal and often jovial nature
of conversation on IRC. Words that are commonly changed include: enough
= enuf, you = u, what = wot, because = coz, want to = wanna, don\'t know
= dunno, etc.

The use of bold, underlining, exclamation marks and capitals serve as
they do in other written forms, to emphasise particular words and
phrases and to indicate tone. There are commands which will highlight a
particular word and exclamation marks work in a similar way to their
conventional use in writing but are sometimes over used for added
emphasis. It is not possible to underline something on IRC so instead
words are emphasised by adding one underline before and after the word
or phrase, eg, \_both\_. The use of capitals on IRC indicates that
someone is shouting, eg:

      

    [IronEagle] I HATE EDNA, EDNA IS A BITCH..........OF A MACHINE  

    [IronEagle] I HAVE BUT ONE QUESTION.........WHY?  

The problem with substituting textual forms for NVC is that it becomes
conscious and highly constructed. In FTF communication, NVC is, as
Forgas (1989) argues, more immediate and unconscious. Most of the time
we are unaware of our body movements or our facial expressions and so
they are more likely to reflect feelings that are not expressed in
words. This factor alone makes it more difficult to tell what a person
is feeling or thinking on IRC. This is something that IRC users are
aware of:

M: *Its not unconscious. I am sitting here wiggling my feet around. I
know I wiggle my feet around when I think and I didn\'t know about that
until I started going out with Ginnie ; I might scratch or stretch or
yawn or take off my clothes and run around naked. You can\'t make up for
that on IRC ; I think it is another thing that goes with using IRC for a
while. Very often I will cough and most likely I\'ll type that in, just
\*cough\* or \*yawn\* and people will ask me if I am bored and I\'ll
say, \"no, I\'m just yawning\", it has no underlying meaning to anything
else on the channel ; It is conscious though. I mean I have been using
IRC for 4 years and I don\'t subconsciously type stuff, even my yawns
are conscious, I have to type them in.*

NVC is also used in FTF communication to validate statements. It is
often thought to show the truth in something someone says. On IRC it
becomes much easier to use an appropriate emoticon to validate a
statement even though the truth may not being told. Given this
potential, IRC relationships involve more trust in what someone is
saying is true as there is no unconscious NVC that can be used to
suggest otherwise. This is something that many users of IRC worry about
when attempting to form relationships and was reflected in comments from
the survey:

They are not tangible coz I need something physical to see when I talk
to someone. It helps me determine what is true and what is not. Body
language is SO important in the way people perceive others and without
that tone of voice a relationship is difficult to solidify.

This point was also brought up in the interviews:

B:*Talking to her on IRC you don\'t really know what she is doing or
thinking. So like on IRC there was always this bit of paranoia, that she
didn\'t like me and all that. But comparing that to being with her, you
could here her voice, see her smile, you could hear her smile; brought
on a bit more confidence that she liked me and appreciated me.*\
Elisabeth: *So you think that nonverbal is still important?*\
B: *Yeah, not just words, like a head shake or nod. You don\'t actually
have to say those things to know they are happening.*

Nevertheless, these technologies provide a communicative richness
regarding emotions, tone and so on which compensates for the absence of
physical presence and NVC on IRC.

It is obvious that users of IRC recognised the need for both verbal and
NVC for the formation of their relationships and so adapted the medium
to allow for both to occur. This form of communication has become an
agreed convention for users of IRC, however, agreement is also needed
for a key aspect of communication ( context.

### B. Context

The physical environment also plays an important role in the formation
of FTF relationships. Altman and Taylor (1973) define physical
environment as the use of physical areas and objects and the
manipulation of space between people. Physical areas and objects provide
a context for relationship formation, providing information about the
other person and appropriate behaviour for that situation. The
manipulation of personal space between people, for example, provides
information about the relationship. Such space is thought to decrease as
intimacy increases (Altman & Taylor, 1973). The physical environment is
also of importance to Levinger and Snoek (1972) who argue that people in
close physical proximity are more likely to form relationships. Being
geographically close to others provides increased opportunities to
become aware of and develop relationships with them.

However, on IRC there is no physical environment in which people meet to
communicate and for that reason could be considered \'contextless\'. As
users are not in each others\' physical presence, there are no areas,
objects or personal space from which to become aware of others or gain
conversation cues. Yet IRC becomes the context for different types of
relationships in two ways: a) through the recognition by users that IRC
provides a common location for communication, and b) by the creation of
channels.

### a) Common Location

With no common area in which to meet, IRC itself becomes the context.
IRC, while not a physical area, provides a \"virtual\" space or location
for communication, hence the use of terms such as cyberspace. However,
it is only through an \"imagined shared context\" (Rheingold, 1994, p
176) that users can have such a context. Stone (1991) points out that
the use of CMC has brought about a new mode of interpersonal interaction
and \"a new manifestation of a social space that has been better known
in its older and more familiar forms in conference calls,  letters, and
 fireside chats. It can be characterised as \'virtual\' space - an
imaginary locus of interaction created by communal agreement.\" (pp
83-84) While the context created is a common space or location, the
context is also \"a cognitive and social one\" (Rheingold, 1994, p 61)
in which contextual meaning for the formation of relationships is found:
\"It\'s like having the corner bar, complete with old buddies and
delightful newcomers and new tools waiting to take home and fresh
graffiti and letters, except instead of putting on my coat, shutting
down the computer, and walking down to the corner, I just invoke my
telecom program and there they are. It\'s a place.\" (Rheingold, 1994, p
24)

Without a context, formation of relationships would be impossible. It
seems that users of IRC have accepted the concept of \'virtual\' space
or cyberspace to provide the context for their communications. This
acceptance was found in the surveys and logs on IRC. One survey
participant stated that \"it is like a favourite coffee-house one drops
in for a chat.\" In the following log it can be seen how the context
becomes accepted to the point where it is no longer a conscious part of
communication on IRC:


    *Mistic* we all come on IRC to talk to ppl  

    *Mistic* no other reason ...  

    *Lisabeth* thats true, how then do we etablish relationships... we have to  

    have some sort of overall setting that enables us to communicate ...  

    *Mistic* like hmmm  

    *Mistic* ya just tlak to ppl cause you can i think  

    *Mistic* and you don't need an introduction  

    *Mistic* there is no hesitation...  

    *Mistic* like all that stuff is discarded when you IRC..  

    *Lisabeth* ok, is it because as a group of people, all users of IRC agree that it  

    is a place to talk, that there are no boundaries and you can talk to or reject  

    people ...  

    *Mistic* yeah ...  

    *Lisabeth* so IRC becomes a "place" or a location like you would when you  

    go to a party for instnace ...  

    *Mistic* yeah  

    *Mistic* IRC as a whole..  

With acceptance of IRC as being a virtual environment, there are certain
characteristics of this environment which affect communication and the
formation of relationships. Such a characteristic is time. On IRC it
takes longer to communicate with someone than it would on a FTF level as
text must be typed, sent to another person, read by that other person
and a reply typed and returned. Often there will be added time lag
between the sending of messages and the receiving of them because the
connection is slow or the communications system is overloaded. This
would indicate that it takes much longer to reach comparable stages in
the formation of a relationship on IRC than it does FTF. Users of IRC
wishing to form a relationship will need to have a certain amount of
patience. As one interviewee said:

A: *Just as easy as it is to make relationships, it is just as easy to
break them as well. Just because of one simple word that is lacking in
most ppl on the net: patience. They might express, \"oh, look, you can
send email around the world in less than ten seconds\", or however quick
it is, and if you mail someone, and if they don\'t mail you back, you
might think that there is something wrong here and they start to panic
and stuff. And it happens because they don\'t have patience.*

Communication does take longer on IRC and as a consequence relationships
would require more time to progress through conventional stages of
development. However, a result of this aspect of the medium is that a
relationship may progress to intimate levels more quickly, bypassing the
more physical dimensions of small talk. When talking on IRC finding out
about people is the prime focus. In a FTF context people talk about
their surroundings, the weather, and so on, to avoid talking about
themselves. People also go to the movies or somewhere which becomes the
basis of a conversation. Yet, on IRC, with no physical environment to
talk about, the crossroads of a relationship may be reached rather
quickly. One participant of the survey noted the rapid development and
decline of relationships on IRC:

IRC relationships come and go alot easier they tend to be more
\'passionate\' or \'exciting\' but then tend to fade away just as fast.

With the obvious frustration that some people experience when trying to
communicate with friends on IRC, some users will resort to other forms
of communication to explore their relationships further. When users were
asked in the survey whether their IRC relationships had gone beyond
communication on IRC, every participant had. The most common forms of
additional communication were the exchange of photos (either on-line or
through the post), writing letters, phone calls, and \'real life\'
meetings.

In other words, for many IRC users, communication on IRC is inserted
into \'traditional\' means of communication in relationship formation.

### b) Channels

Social demographic similarity is one factor that brings together people
to form relationships. It is more likely that someone will notice and
come across people who are of the same, ethnicity, religion, status or
occupation as their own (Levinger & Snoek, 1972). These demographics
often provide social contexts for communication. On IRC, the creation of
channels also serves as social contexts, often forming around
demographic similarities.

Channels are public areas which people can enter to talk with a group of
people. Joining a channel is similar to walking down a corridor with
many doors on either side and picking one door to enter. Walking through
one of these doorways is like walking into a room. Inside these rooms
there maybe many people or just one or two. Channels have names, and it
is usually the name that will influence someone to join it. These names
indicate either a demographic, topic of conversation or the name of the
person who started the channel. Channels therefore serve to bring people
with similar demographics into contact so that they can form
relationships.

There are a wide range of demographics which are reflected in IRC
channels. There are many channels for people with computer interests
such as \#linux, \#mac, \#dos, etc which are a result of a majority of
people on IRC being male university students who study some form of
computing or graduates working in the computer industry. These channels
therefore reflect a similar occupation or status. Channels such as
\#Islam, \#Wicca, \#Christian, etc, bring people of the same religion or
spirituality together. There are also channels that refer to nationality
such as \#Aussies, \#Canada, \#Taiwan, etc.

Channels also form around similar interests. \#BDSM (Bondage,
discipline, sadism and masochism) allows people who are involved in that
sort of behaviour, or just curious about it to communicate. \#NBA allows
people who are interested in basketball to come into contact. When asked
about this factor on IRC, one user responded:

      

    [Pax] ... #'s are the communication...ppl gather at their interests  

While the channels bring together people with common interests, they
also serve to bring people together who may never have come into contact
otherwise. As one survey participant said, \"I find that many
interesting chats take place with people from ethnic, national, or age
groups that I would not usually be in touch with.\"

There are also channels created on IRC that have no bearing at all on
demographic characteristics. Some are merely formed for the purposed of
chatting with others, eg, \#chat, \#talk, etc. While this may not seem
to provide a context, Rheingold (1994) says that \"idle talk \_is\_
context-setting. Idle talk is where people learn what kind of person you
are, why you should be trusted or mistrusted, what interests you.\" (p
60) Idle talk is only seen to be contextless when viewed from a
task-related perspective. If it is viewed in the context of forming
relationships, idle talk is not pointless, but the point of
communication.

With a common space and social context for communication, IRC users have
the means to form relationships and find out about other people.
However, finding out what \"kind of person you are\" is a far more
complex phenomenon than may first be thought. This will be discussed in
the following chapter.

### next\... [Chapter Three](/communication-research/academic/byrne-e-cyberfusion-1993/thesis1-chapt3.html)

###### HTML by Stephen Gillies : max\@magna.com.au Copyright Elisabeth Byrne 1994 : University of Western Sydney, Nepean
