---
title: 'Liz Byrne: Thesis :CyberFusion' 
author: Elisabeth Byrne
datecreated: November 1994
status: historical
layout: default
---


### Chapter One : Literature Review

**Section One : Relationship Formation**

The formation of relationships has always been of interest to
researchers of social psychology, but it was not until the 1970s that
the bulk of theory began to emerge. It was during this time that a wide
range of paradigms were developed, but \"the domain of relationship
development is awesomely vast and incompletely charted\" (Duck &
Gilmour, 1981a, p vii). Two theories that emerged in the 70s were social
penetration theory (Altman & Taylor, 1973) and another based around
attraction by Levinger and Snoek (1972). Both stem from the social
psychological paradigm and offer two useful and complementary models of
relationship development.

#### A. Social Penetration Theory

Social Penetration theory was devised by Altman and Taylor in 1973 in an
attempt to explain the development of interpersonal relationships from
strangers to good friends. They propose that relationship formation will
proceed gradually and in an orderly fashion, through reciprocal exchange
from non-intimate, relatively unemotional aspects of the selves to
intimate, private and vulnerable central core aspects of the selves
(Duck & Gilmour, 1981a, p 15).

The events that occur in the formation of any relationship are,
according to Altman and Taylor (1973), encompassed by four \"social
penetration processes\": verbal exchange, nonverbal use of the body, use
of physical environment, and interpersonal perceptions. All of these
processes occur in different ways at different levels of intimacy and
encounter.

Verbal behaviours provide the informational content of an interaction
while nonverbal behaviour involves use of the body, such as postures and
position, gestures, limb and head movements, facial expressions such as
smiling, eye gaze, etc. Use of the physical environment includes
manipulation of spatial features including personal space between people
and of physical objects and areas. All of these communicative behaviours
are accompanied by subjective, interpersonal perceptions as to what the
other communicant is like.

Altman and Taylor (1973) also point out that many factors work along
side communication to hinder or influence the formation of
relationships. They put these into three classes. The first is the
personal characteristics of the participants involved in the
interaction. The looks, personality and social needs of each person in
an interaction will influence how they manage the interaction. The
second is the outcome of the exchange as to whether the participants
liked one another or if they feel there is something to be gained from
the relationship. The third and last is the situational context which
will dictate whether the participants are free to enter or leave a
relationship, or whether they are forced to maintain a tie because of
social constraints.

Within the theory, Altman and Taylor (1973) make two hypotheses. The
first hypothesis is \"that interpersonal exchange gradually progresses
over time from superficial, nonintimate areas to more intimate, deeper
layers of the selves of the social actors. That people are generally
believed to let others know them gradually\" (Altman & Taylor, 1973, p
10). This hypothesis postulates an \'onion skin\' structure of
personality. This suggests that a person has a series of layers to their
personality. The outer layers are thought to hold the more physical
characteristics (such as looks), while the inner layers hold aspects of
personality. It is the social penetration process that people use to
gradually and systematically move from the outer to the inner layers of
personality and finally to the core or \'real\' person.

When a relationship is developing, more and more layers of personality
are stripped away and intimacy (defined as the degree of union with or
openness towards another person) is said to increase as a result. Altman
and Taylor (1973) point to self disclosure as the means by which people
move from the outer layers to the more intimate levels of personality.
They categorise this progression in four levels of relationship: a)
orientation, b) exploratory affective exchange, c) affective exchange
and d) stable exchange. As each of these levels are reached, both
breadth (the content level) and depth (the intimacy level) of message
content increase through reciprocal self disclosure. In the orientation
level, initial contact is made with only peripheral aspects of
personality accessible to the other. In the second level, more
information is available to each other and the relationship tends to be
friendly and casual without commitment. At the stage of affective
exchange, the people involved get to know more about the central aspects
of each other\'s personality, and as a result, become more vulnerable to
each other. At the final level, the people are free to express
spontaneously many aspects of their personalities and share private
feelings and experiences (Altman & Taylor, 1973, pp 138-139).

The second hypothesis is \"that people assess interpersonal rewards and
costs, dissatisfaction and satisfaction, gained from interaction with
others, and that advancement of the relationship is dependent on the
amount and nature of these. People assess interactions and predict
implications of further exchanges. If the future looks favourable, the
pair then move to more intimate levels of encounter\" (Altman & Taylor,
1973, p 12). This rewards/costs ratio is taken from social exchange
models of relationship development. Exchange frameworks assume that the
development of a relationship is based on the satisfactory exchange of
rewards, like a form of currency, between partners. After initial
attraction has occurred in a relationship, deeper involvement occurs
when the partner provides rewards that are not easily available
elsewhere and the levels of rewards are high enough to motivate the
partners to intensify their involvement (Cate & Lloyd, 1988, p 417).

Overall, Altman and Taylor (1973) recognise that within relationships,
there is both the influence of personal perceptions as well as social
and environmental factors. They also recognise that there is a great
diversity of relationships in both form and content, but they seek to
develop some general empirical and theoretical notions about the
formation of relationships.

#### B. Attraction

\'Attraction\' is readily recognised as an important aspect in the
formation of relationships, but this is usually associated with a
person\'s looks or appearance. However, the earliest work on attraction
recognised that people where attracted to others for a number of reasons
whether physical properties (Perrin, 1921, cited in Duck and Miell,
1984), behavioural features (Thomas & Young, 1938, cited in Duck and
Miell, 1984) or personality and opinion characteristics (Richardson,
1939, cited in Duck and Miell, 1984). More recently, researchers have
developed the idea that the main influence on attractiveness was not the
pre-existing properties of individuals, but the relationship of these
properties to one another. This research looks at personality
similarity, complementarity of needs, physical appearance, matching of
self esteem with other features of partner, and role congruence in the
relationship (Duck & Miell, 1984, p 230).

A theory developed by Levinger and Snoek (1972) has its basis in this
attraction paradigm. They also use a \'filter\' or \'stage\' model to
account for the different factors that come into play during the
relationship formation process.

\'Relationship\' is a term commonly used to describe a romantic
attachment between two people; however, the term has a more wide-ranging
definition which encompasses any type of connection between people.
Levinger and Snoek (1972) define relationships at three levels: Level 1
( unilateral awareness, Level 2 ( surface contact, Level 3 ( mutuality.

**Level 1** relationships include an awareness of other people without
enough contact to hold a conversation or for them to become aware of
those who are aware of them. These relationships include the people seen
each morning on the way to school, university or work. They also include
the rock star on the radio or the person walking past in the street. At
this level of relationship there is not only a perception of the other
person, but a reaction of approval, disapproval or indifference occurs
and yet they may pass on without ever exchanging a word.

**Level 2** relationships involve at least minimal interaction. These
often occur with people who perform certain roles in society, for
example, the bus driver, shop assistant or receptionist. Of course this
is not always the case, there are some relationships of this level which
occur in other situations such as with a Great Aunt who is hardly ever
seen.

**Level 3** relationships are the ones that most people would term a
\'relationship\'. In these relationships there is real personal
involvement and intimacy. The other person is perceived as a unique
individual and their personal views are appreciated. Examples of this
type of relationship are close friends and romantic attachments.
However, Levinger and Snoek (1972) put romantic relationships into a
special category of this level of relationship.

Levinger and Snoek (1972) point to the many factors or filters which are
thought to influence and occur during the progression of relationships:
physical proximity, social demographic similarity, physical
attractiveness, attitude similarity, complementarity of needs,
competence, self esteem, positive personal characteristics, reciprocity,
and self disclosure.

Physical proximity is thought to play a large role in determining who
will form a relationship. Most people form relationships with those who
live in a similar geographical area. Physical proximity will often
influence who becomes aware of each other and who relationships will
begin to develop between (Festinger, Schachter and Back, 1950, cited in
Forgas, 1989). In one study new arrivals at a police academy were
allocated to class rooms and dormitories in alphabetical order.
Everything they did together was in alphabetic order. At the end of six
months, each trainee was asked who was their closest friend from the
academy. On average, their closest friend was situated relatively close
in proximity being only 4.5 letters removed in the alphabet from their
own name. (Segal, 1974, cited in Forgas, 1989)

Social demographic similarity is also thought to influence the types of
people who will form relationships. It is more likely that people will
talk to and come into contact with people who are of the same ethnicity,
religion, background, occupation, status, etc (Cate & Lloyd, 1988, p
413). A study by Hollingshead and Redlich (1958, cited in Forgas, 1989)
found that marriages, friendships, cliques and school groupings were
largely made up of people who came from very similar social and
demographic backgrounds.

Physical attractiveness has a particularly important role in the initial
stages of relationship formation. It is often this factor alone that
will influence someone to talk to another. A study by Walster, Aronson,
Abrahams and Rothman (1966, cited in Forgas, 1989) found physical
attractiveness to be the single best predictor of how much each person
liked his or her assigned partner at a computer matched dance, even
after couples had spent hours together.

Attitude similarity has more influence in relationships at the second
level. Once a conversation has been established a person will begin to
notice if the other person has similar attitudes about issues. It is
thought that if another person with similar attitudes is discovered,
then the relationship is more likely to be pursued (Duck & Gilmour,
1981a, p 11-12).

Complementarity of needs is also noticeable in the second level of
relationship. When two people talk it may be found that one has
characteristics the other lacks and vice versa. Complementarity brings
together people in relationships such as dominant/submissive,
extrovert/introvert, and the like (Cate & Lloyd, 1988, p 412).

Competence is a characteristic that will often play an important part in
the formation of a relationship. It has been found that people are often
attracted to others who are intelligent, successful and competent rather
than those who are less so. However, this may have nothing to do with
the perceived benefits of forming a relationship with that person. Of
course, there may also be those who seem to be so perfect that they are
unreal. In this scenario, it is better to have one glaring fault which
will make a person appear at least \'human\' (Aronson, 1976, cited in
Forgas, 1989).

Self esteem also affects relationships at the second level. When self
esteem is low, it is more likely that a person will target another who
is less likely to reject them as potential communicants. If self esteem
is high, then a person may feel that no one will reject them and may
target people they would not normally talk to such as the prettiest girl
in the class or the top executive of the company (Walster, 1965, cited
in Forgas, 1989).

There are thought to be other positive personal characteristics which
people view as good and therefore likeable in a person just as there are
characteristics that are thought bad and therefore unlikeable. Studies
have sought to find characteristics that fit into those two categories.
There are obviously individual differences in what characteristics are
likeable and what are unlikeable, but on the whole honesty and
truthfulness are generally regarded highly (Hobfoll & Stokes, 1988, p
502).

Balance in a relationship is preferable as it is very hard to continue a
relationship that is all one sided. Reciprocity in the initial stages of
a relationship often acts to encourage the continuation of a
relationship. If someone is liked then they are more likely to like that
other person. This is also the case for when someone is disliked
(Burgess, 1981a, p 183).

Self disclosure is seen as an important factor in the continuation of
relationships at both level 2 and 3 relationships. The more information
that is disclosed, the more the other person will find out and in turn
the other person will want to disclose information about themselves. Of
course, if too much information is offered too soon by one person, the
other person may be deterred from continuing the relationship. The
converse is also true; if a person will not disclose anything,
conversation becomes difficult and the interaction may terminate
(Chelune, 1979). This view is similar to the importance that Altman and
Taylor (1973) place on self disclosure.

Levinger and Snoek\'s (1972) model of relationship formation is useful
in its definition of relationships and for the different factors that
influence the relationship process.

### Section Two ( Computer Mediated Communication

The convergence of computers and telecommunications has led to a new
medium for communication, allowing people to form relationships with
each other via their computer even if the other person is on the
opposite side of the globe. People are forming relationships with others
whom they have never met in person with only the aid of text on a
computer screen. The majority of research into CMC has dealt with the
effects of new communication media, such as electronic mail on
organisations (Sproull & Keisler, 1991) as well as the effects of group
decision-making via CMC (Hiltz, Johnson & Turoff, 1986). The focus here
has typically been on task-related uses of CMC, however, more recent
research has dealt with social uses (Steinfield, 1986; Hiltz & Turoff,
1978) and the forming of interpersonal ties (Walther & Burgoon, 1992).

But what exactly is CMC? Rice (1984) defines the systems used in CMC as
\"media that facilitate the exchange of semantic content, transmitted
through telecommunication networks, processed through one or more
computers, between individuals and among groups\" (p 438). Another
definition comes from Walther (1992) who defines CMC as \"synchronous or
asynchronous electronic mail (email) and computer conferencing, by which
senders encode in text their messages that are relayed from senders\'
computers to receivers\'\" (p 52). From the above definitions it can be
ascertained that CMC is either asynchronous or synchronous and that it
involves the exchange of messages first typed on one computer screen and
sent to another person\'s computer in order for that person to read the
message and reply appropriately.

Asynchronous CMC refers to applications such as electronic mail and
network news which enables a person to send a message to another
person\'s computer which is then stored until that person is able to
read it and then reply. Asynchronous CMC has been available for much
longer than synchronous CMC and as a result the bulk of research has
been into this area.

Synchronous CMC deals with computer conferencing and \'real time\'
interaction. One example of this is \'talk\' where two people are able
to communicate simultaneously. Another form, which is the concern of
this thesis, is IRC where many people are able to talk to each other at
once in real time. In synchronous CMC people are able to communicate
immediately with another person as if they were talking to them on a FTF
basis. The research into this area is still in its early stages, but
more studies are beginning to emerge (such as Reid, 1991, 1993;
Rheingold, 1994).

#### Social Presence Theory

A theory widely used by researchers of CMC is social presence theory.
This theory was originally developed by Short, Williams and Christie
(1976) for researching new telecommunications media. They suggest that
these media can transcend time and distance, and convey only part of a
communicator\'s presence. For them the social presence of a medium ( its
ability to convey a communicator\'s presence ( was highest, in direct
FTF communication (where both verbal and nonverbal cues were available)
and much decreased, for example, in a business letter.

The original definition by Short et al (1976) was that they \"regard
Social Presence as being a quality of the communications medium.
Although this is expected to affect the way individuals perceive their
discussions, and their relationships to the persons with whom they are
communicating, it is important to emphasise that Social Presence is
defined as a quality of the medium itself\" (p 65).

The hypothesis is that communications media vary in their degree of
social presence, and that these variations are important in determining
the way individuals interact. Social presence is, therefore, what Rice
(1984) calls \"the personal or social differentiating quality of
communications acts\". There is the feeling that other actors are
jointly involved in communicative interaction. According to Short et al
(1976), the fewer channels or codes available within a medium, the less
attention is paid by the user to the presence of other social
participants. As social presence declines, messages become less personal
and more task oriented: \"The capacity of a medium to transmit
information about facial expression, direction of looking, posture,
dress and non-verbal vocal cues, all contribute to its social
presence.\" (Short et al, 1976, p 65) Initially CMC was thought to have
low social presence because of its perceived absence of NVC to carry
relational information in an interaction. This was thought to make it
unsuitable for establishing relationships. These assumptions brought
about the belief that CMC is \"less friendly, emotional, or personal and
more business like, or task oriented.\" (Rice and Love, 1987)

However, other research has found that there is a socialising aspect to
CMC. Hiltz and Turoff (1978) reported the development of \'online
communities\', and other studies present cases of friendship development
and warm relations on CMC (Steinfield, 1986). It was Walther (1992) who
pointed out that humans are driven to interact with one another; just as
communicators in any context should desire to transact personal,
rewarding, complex relationships, so too do those people using CMC. He
pointed out that people, given the opportunity to interact, will not
merely contain their communications to business or task orientation, but
will develop relationships despite using a medium that offers little or
no NVC.

Despite this change in CMC research, social presence theory is still
used as it provides a useful method for understanding how the medium of
communication and users\' perceptions of that medium alter the nature of
communication in CMC.

### Section Three ( Merging of the two Areas

Theories of relationship development and CMC have been outlined above;
however, it must be recognised that the relationship formation theories
are designed for use at a FTF level and that social presence theory is
not designed to study relationship development. So that interpersonal
relationships can be researched within the context of CMC, the two areas
will be converged. To achieve this, the three theories will be
critically examined to develop a suitable framework.

There are three factors of social penetration theory which have
attracted criticism: the rewards/costs ratio, the orderly and systematic
progression of a relationship, and the \'onion skin\' structure of
personality.

First, the rewards/costs ratio is a very instrumental way of describing
the decision that a person makes to continue a relationship or not.
While the ratio was merely developed as a means of describing the
process of that decision, obviously not all relationships are formed
purely on the perceived benefits to oneself (Altman & Taylor, 1973, p
184). This maybe seen in relationships where one person is in need and
the person helping them does not appear to be gaining anything from the
relationship.

Secondly, relationships rarely develop in an orderly and systematic way,
and this is seen in the different rates at which some people will
disclose information about themselves (Altman & Taylor, 1973, p 183).
Many relationships develop very quickly when an \'open\' person
initiates a communication, while other relationships may take months to
develop because of distance or inability to communicate effectively.
Some relationships may be constrained by the context they are within
such as work or shared leisure activities.

Thirdly, the \'onion skin\' structure of personality implies that people
have layers of personality that must be stripped away to find the
\'real\' person. A question that emerges here is whether there is a real
person to be found (Altman & Taylor, 1973, p 187). There have been a
number of different theoretical perspectives which have challenged the
notion that there is a singular authentic core to the self. While the
\'onion skin\' structure is useful for understanding the process of
finding out about a person, the issue of the real person or self at the
middle of the onion needs to be addressed.

Levinger and Snoek\'s (1972) theory also comes up for criticism on three
levels: the dispute over definition, the absence of the social, and the
focus on intimate relationships.

First, there appears to be great confusion amongst theorists within the
attraction paradigm over the definition of key terms such as attraction,
love, friendship, intimacy and so on. It is vital that these terms have
a common definition so they can be interchanged and understood when
looking at other theorists\' work (McCarthy, 1981, p 24-25).

Secondly, attraction theorists have not paid significant attention to
the social significance of interactions between individuals. However,
the \'filtering\' approach does seek to address some aspects of the
social. The various factors involved throughout a relationship are seen
as an ongoing continuity in which people are continually making
decisions about the relationship. Also, it shows that different features
of a partner are relevant at different stages of a relationship. Hence,
partners who fail to meet one of the criteria at any stage of the
relationship will be filtered out of a group of friends. However, it is
still only the features of social partners that had been explored, not
the social features of partners ( and certainly not the social
significance of the social processing of partners. (Duck & Miell, 1984,
p 231)

Thirdly, when studying the development of relationships, it is
inevitable that some of these relationships may develop into love or
marriage. Despite this acknowledgment, issues surrounding gender and
power differences, identified by the rise of feminism, have not been
taken into consideration. This criticism can apply to both social
penetration and attraction theories. Altman and Taylor (1973) assume
that the social penetration will be deeper if the relationship continues
onto love or marriage, while Levinger and Snoek (1972) assume that if
the relationship develops into love or marriage then attraction and
information has increased and become more complex. Neither theorists
take into consideration the differences that may be caused by the
formation of relationships between two people of the same gender or two
people of opposite genders. They fail to take account of the fact that
relationships hardly ever occur between equals. No matter what
relationship is analysed, there are always expected roles for each
person which is often reflected in the \'power\' that one has in
relation to the other.

Social presence theory has also been held up for criticism. This theory
has been criticised for its vague definition and its ability to explain
CMC.

The vague definition of social presence theory has contributed to the
debate in CMC literature as to whether it is the medium itself that
alters communication or the perceptions of those using the medium that
determines communication differences. Short et al (1976) state that
social presence is a quality of the medium and that this will affect the
way individuals communicate, however their research suggests that it is
the users perceptions of the medium that will influence how they
communicate. This uncertainty has been reflected in following studies
into CMC (Steinfield, 1986). Both Walther (1992) and Rice (1984) state
that it is important to look at both medium characteristics and user
perceptions to obtain an accurate view of communication in a computer
mediated environment.

The second criticism of social presence theory is aimed more at its use
by CMC researchers. It was originally developed for studying new
telecommunications media (audio and video teleconferencing) which do not
have the same characteristics as CMC. As has already been noted, the use
of this theory contributed to the early assumptions that CMC was less
personal and more suited to task-related functions. These findings also
led to the development of similar theories ( lack of social context cues
(Sproull & Keisler, 1986, cited in Walther, 1992) and media richness
(Daft & Lengel, 1984, cited in Walther, 1992) ( which suggest that the
absence of NVC leads to CMC being defined as \'lean\'. However, when
relationships began to form through CMC it was necessary to question why
this was happening. Walther and Burgoon (1992) offered one solution to
the problem by stating that limited time for experiments was the reason
for earlier research findings. They pointed out that the impersonal
aspects of CMC were limited to initial encounters between users. He said
that researchers had not allowed enough time for experiments and so the
interpersonal ties were not manifesting themselves. It was only after
longer periods of time that relationships began to develop in any
substantial manner.

After looking at the criticisms of each theory three major points can be
identified: the effect of the medium on communication, problems of
presenting and perceiving the self, and the issue of power in
relationships. Each of these will be discussed in the following
chapters.

However, despite the theories\' short fallings, there are useful parts
of each one which can be utilised and brought together.

Social penetration theory is useful for its recognition of relationship
development as an ongoing process, its use of verbal, nonverbal,
environmental and personal perceptions as factors of relational
development, and its recognition that there is a great diversity of
relationships. It must also be acknowledged that the rewards/costs ratio
is part of the theory but needs to be made more flexible and subjective
for each different relationship. The \'onion skin\' structure of
personality will be investigated in the section on the self but the
gradual and systematic progression of relationships will be disregarded.

The attraction theory is useful for its definition of the different
levels of relationship. It is also useful for its \'filtering\' approach
which provides a range of factors affecting different stages of the
process of relationship formation without limiting it to self disclosure
as in social penetration theory.

Social presence theory is useful as it points to the medium as the
differentiating source in the alteration of communication. It also
points to personal perceptions as playing a role in the way
communication is affected. It will not be assumed automatically that
social presence is low, but this will be tested out in the section on
medium.

This brings about a framework that enables the investigation of the
ongoing process of relationship development through a series of filters
in an altered medium of communication.

### Section Four : Methodology

Many of the limitations and problems with the research on CMC and
interpersonal relationships, are the result of researchers only working
from one method or one theoretical framework. A general criticism of the
relational literature is that theorists have tried to fit the complex
investigation of interpersonal relationships into a singular paradigm.
Social presence theory was criticised for limiting its research to
laboratory settings using simulated tasks and unrepresentative ad hoc
groups (Rice, 1984, p 61). As a result, Rice (1984) says that there is a
need to rethink the contexts and paradigms by which CMC research is
organised. There is a need to inspect assumptions, theoretical
perspectives, implementation, and analyses of CMC. This view is also
expressed in relation to the interpersonal relationship literature by
Morton and Douglas (1981) who state that the current array of theories
and methods may not be sufficient to navigate the vastness of
relationship development.

There is also concern that researchers are limiting their methods of
investigation. By only conducting laboratory experiments, or only
distributing surveys, the study becomes limited in its ability to make
generalisations that apply to their area of study. This implies a need
for cross validity: the more methods used in a study, the wider the
range and accuracy of results can be obtained. Altman and Taylor (1973)
provide a good example of cross validity. In researching social
penetration theory, they used short and long term laboratory
experiments, field questionnaires, social isolation studies, and role
playing studies to understand the complex nature of relationship
formation.

A range of methods also allow both quantitative and qualitative
approaches. Rice (1984) states that research using only quantitative
methods, such as manipulated experiments, seldom provide a satisfactory
understanding of behaviour in a new communication medium. By including
qualitative research, a more fuller understanding can be obtained of the
subject beyond statistical data.

In addition, multiple methods also point to a mixture of positivist and
interpretative frameworks. A positivist framework implies that there are
exact causes of particular effects, while an interpretative framework
allows for human agency and interpretation of results by the researcher
(Littlejohn, 1989). Research on relationships in CMC has arrived at many
different conclusions that would imply that there is no right or wrong
answer. It is therefore important to make room for interpretation of
results and to give humans agency in which their perceptions are
important.

Taking these limitations into consideration, it is necessary to have a
methodology that draws upon a variety of theoretical approaches as well
as encompassing differing methods of investigation. For this thesis,
four methods were used: literature review, on-line surveys, FTF
interviews and session logging.

An extensive literature review was undertaken so as to understand the
issues that are involved with the study of cyberspace. It was necessary
to do this to understand the context in which relationships were being
formed and the ways in which users perceived their relationships on IRC.
The literature review also helped to define the issues and questions
that the thesis was to address. In the previous sections of this
chapter, the main literature was outlined and the questions and problems
to be addressed were isolated.

Surveys were distributed to users of IRC by means of an IRC emailing
list. This list consists of a majority of users from channel (\#)
Aussies most of whom are Australian with a few from other countries.
Approximately 100 people received surveys with only half of them being
returned. The questions asked included simple demographic information as
well as asking users about their use of IRC and their experiences with
relationships. The information gained provided statistical and
generalisable information about the formation of relationships on IRC.
(For a copy of the survey please see the
[Appendix.](/communication-research/academic/byrne-e-cyberfusion-1993/thesis1-rest.html#append))

Interviews were conducted with five different users of IRC on a FTF
level. These five people each outlined specific relationships they have
had with people on IRC. The interviews were not based on a set of fixed
questions, but instead were open ended and loosely structured to allow
the interviewees to generate their own narratives about their
experiences on IRC. The interviewees were volunteers and their
information provided more detailed and personal information about
relationship formation than did the surveys. When quoting them in the
body of the thesis, only the first initial of their IRC nick is used to
ensure anonymity.

Many IRC sessions were logged over an 11-month period from December 1993
to October 1994 at random times to record the everyday happenings of
IRC. The majority of logs were from \#Aussies, however, on occasion logs
of other channels were recorded when people wished to talk about a
specific experience they had had. The people on \#Aussies were made
aware of the fact they were being logged but they did not know when in
particular as the logs were random. For use in the thesis, the logs were
stored in their complete form and useful parts were isolated and
reproduced with the original spelling. Omissions to the quotes are
marked by three dots where information was irrelevant or to protect the
privacy of some individuals. Permission was gained from all people
quoted in the body of the thesis. By logging events on the one channel,
trends in the behaviour of a particular group of people could be
observed including the formation of new relationships and the
maintaining of already established ones. The logs showed an accurate
picture of what happens on IRC including relationship formation and
avoidance, chatting, joking, fighting, etc.

### next\... [Chapter Two](/communication-research/academic/byrne-e-cyberfusion-1993/thesis1-chapt2.html)

###### HTML by Stephen Gillies : max\@magna.com.au Copyright Elisabeth Byrne 1994 : University of Western Sydney, Nepean
