---
title: 'Liz Byrne: Thesis :CyberFusion'
author: Elisabeth Byrne
datecreated: November 1994
status: historical
layout: default
---


Conclusion
----------

This thesis has sought to explore the nature of relationship formation
on IRC by recourse to three theories. These theories showed that
relationships formed on IRC bore many similarities to FTF relationships,
however, because new technology reshapes human relationships and because
of the specific medium of CMC and its absence of physical presence, it
was shown that communication on IRC is developed in a specific nature as
users adapt to the weaknesses and strengths of the medium. As a result,
this thesis showed that IRC developed a communicative richness, novel
ways of expressing information and emotional meaning in relationship
formation.

This thesis also explored, however, the nature of the presentation and
perception of self in CMC in contrast to the relatively simple notions
of self expressed in the relationship formation theories. It was
suggested that the peculiar nature of CMC and its absence of physical
presence, highlights the extent to which the self presented in
relationships is relatively fluid depending on issues such as context.
Using Goffman (1969) this thesis explored the various dimensions of the
self on IRC.

It was also noted, however, that IRC like all communications
technologies is inserted and developed in the context of existing social
relations. It explored therefore the way in which traditional forms of
power are negotiated on IRC focusing particularly on the question of
gender but also the way in which new forms of power relations are
developed through the new medium.

Despite the radical changes that CMC has brought in altering human
communication and the formation of relationships, these processes are in
fact reproductions of traditional forms of communication. Cyberspace
will not be the means through which inherent inequalities and
differences are broken down, but through the recognition by humans that
no matter how they communicate they are bringing themselves to that act
and that it is themselves that have to be changed.

The issues raised and discussed in the thesis are still important for
understanding the use of CMC for human communication. Still, issues such
as power and difference, especially in relation to gender need to be
investigated further to gain a deeper understanding the complete impact
that such a medium will have on human communication in the future.

### next\... [Reference List](/communication-research/academic/byrne-e-cyberfusion-1993/thesis1-rest.html)

###### HTML by Stephen Gillies : max\@magna.com.au Copyright Elisabeth Byrne 1994 : University of Western Sydney, Nepean
