---
title: Scripts for ircII
status: historical
layout: default
---
# Scripts for ircII

* * *

## Introduction

Only [ircII](/irchelp/ircii/) scripts are maintained here - mIRC users please
see our [mIRC page](/irchelp/mirc/) for scripts and help.

There are no bots or scripts here that will help you flood, hack, or otherwise
abuse IRC.

IRC scripts are automated programs that can make IRC easier and more fun, by
giving you conveniences and extra features not found in your standard client.
Convenience scripts save you time and effort, for example, instead of typing
"/join" you can just type "/j" to join a channel. Protection scripts can
protect you against hacking, flooding, and other IRC evils.

We the helpers on EFnet #IRChelp channel believe that the best script is still
one that you write yourself, because only then can you fully control its
actions so you don't unwittingly get in trouble or compromise your security.
Unfortunately many newbies blindly download hideous scripts like Phoenix or
LiCe which are buggy, bloated, riddled with backdoors (security compromises),
or encourage warlike behavior which will get you in trouble (kicked, banned,
or worse).

I therefore present some scripts below which are all designed to enhance your
IRC enjoyment by providing convenient shortcuts, fun features, and protective
powers, while avoiding annoyances which will get you in trouble, and all have
been verified to be free of backdoors. _These scripts are not endorsed by the
\#IRChelp ops, nor will we provide help for their installation and use._ You're
on your own - learn and explore the help files and comments that come with
each script!

## JoloPak: General Convenience Script

  * **[Jolopak Home Page](jolopak.html)** - download, installation and help 

If you're relatively new to ircII and looking for an all-in-one convenience
script to use or learn from, check out my [Jolopak](jolopak.html). This is
typical bloatware, meaning it has lots of interesting as well as totally
useless features. Unlike most bloatware, however, this one is benign and is
unlikely to get you cracked, /kick'd, or /kill'd. I'm a very average script
writer, but as an #IRChelp op and the webmaster of this site, I came across a
lot of good information and decided to collect the best stuff together into
one script. The script combines the best parts (IMHO) of Barron's SuperPak
with a lot of custom features contributed by other #IRChelp experts. JoloPak
includes NickCompleter.irc and nocolor listed below.

## Robin: Channel Protection Script

  * **[Robin Home Page](robin.html)** - download, installation and help 

If you are trying to run a semi-permanent channel, you may need more than the
basic defensive tools that come with JoloPak above. David Hansen aka Turtle
custom developed "robin," a channel protection script that should do just the
trick. This is intended for more advanced users. It should be compatible with
Jolopak so that you can use both at the same time.

## Script Packages

For those who want really complete script packs, `superpak.scr.gz`
is the mother of JoloPak and contains a ton of obscure but interesting
features, plus a lot of stuff which is either harmlessly redundant or just
useless. (That's why I was motivated to clean it up to make the JoloPak.)
Another excellent script package recommended very highly is
`ppak207.tar.gz`.

## Miscellaneous Script Modules

[NickCompleter.irc](NickCompleter.irc) by "DC-itsme" is an invaluable tool
which completes nicknames of people on your channel after you type just the
first few letters. This is useful whether you want to /msg or /kick people
with unusual nicks like "_-l3et-_". This script is included as part of JoloPak
above.

The color stripping script [nocolor](nocolor.txt) is provided as relief for
ircII users against mIRC color codes. It comes with detailed directions.
